hello my name is Mona and thank you for
tuning into this ktv original
programming i'm joined by yoga teachers
students and friends in these episodes
of yoga with Mona for everybody in an
effort to bring the benefits of yoga
into our community to enhance our
community's health we're kind of known
loosely as the Sun Moon group and our
overall mission is yoga and healthy
lifestyle education to enhance our
community's health today we've got an
episode on things that you can do at
home in chairs i'm joined by lynn rosen
also our prenatal yoga teacher really
good friend vicki laruen and yoga
student for a very long time and also
yoga student for a long time Julie Thor
lifson so we're going to share with you
some of the things that we do in our
yoga care classes we all are great fans
of yoga care there's a lot of great tips
that we can share with you that you can
do on your own at home if you have a
chair in the vicinity that you think you
might like to join us i'd ask you to go
ahead and pull it out now be prepared to
jump in with any of the activities that
we're doing thanks for joining me today
ladies I think we're gonna have some
super fun thanks
we're going to work from the ground up
today with our feet and we're going to
use something that a lot of people can
find pretty easily tennis ball now if
you don't have a tennis ball at home you
can use sometimes I golf ball some other
small balls that you might use against
the bottom of your foot but you can also
use a can so if you had a can in the
kitchen that you could roll the bottom
of your foot back and forth across that
might work really well so let's go ahead
and take whatever you might find and
something that you can roll your foot on
and let's go ahead and place our feet on
this and start rolling around while I'm
talking so we're using tennis balls to
massage the bottoms of our feet for a
variety of different reasons and for
many different health issues this can be
helpful neuropathy perhaps a loss of
sensation at the bottom of the foot we
have 7,000 nerve endings at the bottom
of our feet and so we can stimulate
those nerve endings and improve the
feeling or benefit I'm out that we can
feel the ground with our feet let's
switch sides while I'm talking another
thing that we can do is break down that
fascial layer called the plantar fascia
that runs just all the way across the
bottom of the foot and up under your
heel a tightening of this planter
fashion can cause heel spurs the
tightening of this planter fashion can
cause a tightening all of the back of
the leg so just taking a tennis ball or
again a can of vegetables from the
larder and just rolling it back and
forth across the bottom of your foot can
do a great deal to break down that
faccia and give you a little bit more
flexibility
let's just do one more on each side
everyone and try to get all the way
around the little toes the base of the
toes and also at the base of the heel
reflexology points are also all over the
bottoms of your feet so by stimulating
the bottoms of the feet you can get an
overall stimulation effect for your
entire central nervous system and you
know if you happen to be on a long car
trip or have to be on a here airplane
for a long period of time you can take
them all with you yes such a good point
I almost forgot to make that they can't
i'm glad you brought it up because this
is something you can do at home but this
is something you can do just about
anywhere and the benefits are not just
for the feet again when you're flying
and there's a fear of deep vein
thrombosis and a lot of those other more
serious health issues that can occur
from being set a chair for a long period
of time a little tennis ball is not only
fun but could actually be a lifesaver
right into your bag and you can play
tennis too when you get there let's go
ahead and slip the tennis ball off to
the side now and we're going to walk
into our feet up some exercises for the
feet and so we'll start by saying about
picking up that big toe and leading the
other toes on the mat and then we'll
switch it out we'll put the big toe down
we'll pick a little what's up and so
it's kind of a game you can play with
yourself and just try at home picking up
your big toe if you've got your shoes
off you want to slip those shoes off
right away and spend a little time with
your bare feet and big toe download toes
up
and then we're just going to place all
our toes down then we're just going to
kind of pummel our feet against the
ground just lightly again it's a
stimulation you can do this seated
you'll feel it moving right up into the
bones you want to feel a gentle
vibration in the joints you know not but
just something a little bit light and
then after you do that you just want to
pause for a moment and that combination
of the tennis ball and then the
pummeling of the feet you can feel a
nice little tingling up your legs do you
feel that at all Julie how about you
Lanie feel that in your legs so that
means their legs might be ready for a
little bit more action so we're going to
come to standing and come behind our
chairs so come on up now again if you've
got a chair at home all you need to do
is just stand behind it so go ahead and
pull it out we're going to use the back
of the chair to support us we'll keep
our left foot forward and we're stepping
our right went back so the beauty of
having the chair is that you can lean a
little bit towards it if you need to and
that's going to allow you to push your
back heel down a little bit further if
you have balance issues sometimes you
don't feel confident enough to get a
good stretch now this is a version of a
pose that we can do warrior one and i'm
going to add on to it Vicky is modifying
for our shoulders today so if you're
modifying for your shoulder your neck
anything like that you feel some pain in
the upper part of your body just follow
the lovely Vicky and she'll show you
what to do with your arms we're going to
keep our right hand on the chair to
start and see if we might bring our left
arm forward so at this point we have our
left arm for we've got the palm facing
down let me suggest you do is now turn
your hand so that the palm is facing
sideways and then start to sweep that
arm up in an art towards the ceiling and
see if you can feel that movement coming
all the way through the front of your
body if you feel confident here and you
feel really steady and strong here you
could start to float this hand up off
the chair a little bit and if you
started to feel a little bit nervous
about that you could just place it right
back down
and yoga all the movements are mindful
so let's bring the arm back down but
let's bring it down slowly I'm hugging
our belly in as we lower the arm and
coming back to a really nice and steady
place take a long slow deep breath here
and then to come out of this we're going
to put the weight into the front leg we
just kind of shift forward and lift that
back leg up and then we cut our hands
like this just kind of cap ourselves all
over now if you're not doing anything
else with us but the tapping you're
going to have a lot of fun so you can do
that in the chair you can do that
standing and just kind of tap the larger
muscles of your body kind of loosen you
up a little bit we'll try that on the
other side so this time I believe is the
left leg coming back so if your feet are
right in front of each other you'll feel
like you're on a tight rope go ahead and
move your right foot a little bit to the
right if you feel a wobble then ground
and connect through the bottoms of your
feet remember we stimulated 7000 nerve
endings there so we want to feel a nice
strong connection then balance is a lot
about your course so before we would
take our right arm off the chair back
we're just going to pull our belly in
and then bring that right arm up so I
brought it up shoulder hype I've got my
palm facing down I'm going to turn it so
the palm is facing inward and then start
to sweep it straight up towards the
ceiling and hopefully feeling a nice
lift on the ribcage on the right side of
the body now if you're feeling like you
want to do a little bit more here and
work on your balance you might lift that
left arm right up off the chair
if you feel a bit wobbly or nervous its
place back down
and the movements are mindful and slow
so as you bring that right arm down it's
going to come forward take your time let
it feel beautiful in your body take a
breath and then when we come off it you
kind of want to lean for a little bit
just kind of push off that foot and step
up tap it out all right ladies I'm
thinking it's fall we could be a lovely
grove of trees and so let's bring a
little bit of that beautiful fall energy
to our practice you could be a birch
tree you could be an oak tree you could
be any kind of tree you like and we're
going to stand on our left foot and
we'll bring our right foot in front I'm
going to leave you ladies right where
you are but I'm going to come in front
so you can see my feet and you have an
option of putting your feet like this so
you could rest your heel right against
the ankle bone there you don't have to
lift it up higher on your leg so as we
go forward into the tree if any of you
would like to come into your full tree
pose go ahead and by that I mean they
might want to bring your leg up to here
or even up to here so you can adjust the
height of this leg and especially if
you've got a chair to hold on to I
encourage you to go where it feels best
for you so you've got a hold of the
chair right we've got your leg where you
want it to be and just like we did
earlier you could lift a hand up off the
chair back so if you want to lift a hand
off your chair back or holding on to
your chair again you can bring your arm
up
and with the hand on the chair you could
lift it up and down you might try both
arms up overhead do what works for you
listen to your body and coming out of
our pose keeping our movements mindful
so bringing our arm down slowly and the
other arm down slowly and the leg down
slowly and then we'll tap it out so I'll
come behind my chair for that second
round and we're on the other side now
but again you have that option of
resting your ankle on your heel on your
ankle and then standing up nice and tall
now the beauty of the tree pose is just
like the trees it represents there's a
lot of variety so once you choose your
base and you've got those roots growing
nice and deep you get to decide coming
up your strong tree trunk what you want
to do with your branches and maybe you
want to hold on to that chair the whole
time and if you do you could extend your
branch out any direction that you like
maybe you feel like a full-fledged tree
and fall color and you want to bring
both of your branches out and spread
your fingers really wide again you can
have a lot of fun just extending your
arms in space by keeping one hand
securely at your safety zone just giving
you that opportunity to really open out
on the other side and when we come out
of our poses it's going to be mindful so
nice and slow let's bring our limbs back
in let's start to bring our limbs back
into our little tree trunk here bring
our feet back down to the earth thank
you everyone for a beautiful tree
moving on I think to our twists let's go
ahead and slip these straps off for now
and I think we'll just turn our chairs
around from here so we're just going to
pick them up and turn them around
you've got to cheer at home I'll have
you turn it around and also you're going
to be facing your chair we're going to
sit on our chairs I like to call this
cowgirl style so you're going to sit on
your chair just like you gather yourself
up onto a horse this is for a lovely
twist we're going to place our right arm
just right across the back of the chair
you take your left arm behind your back
you're going to be turning to the left
first make sure that your feet are
engaged so we're not just casual laying
our legs like that but you want to have
a nice right foot plant and a nice left
foot plant and your arm is here and
you're sitting up tall we're going to go
to the left take a nice breath in and
just gently turn your shoulders and your
waist and your hips even if that works
for you a little bit towards the left
take a breath or two and slowly
returning back to Center
will do the same thing on the other side
so it just place your arm right across
the chair this is going to help you sit
up taller lengthen and then just a
little turn just as far as feels good
for you breathing and then we're going
to come nice and slow back to the center
we're going to do that one more time and
then we actually have another twist for
you this episode as well twist of
something it kind of get left out of our
everyday activities I mean we do
twisting when we're grabbing stuff
around but but to actually put a twist
in into your activities as something
rare for people sometimes and that's
where you get your good Oregon Health so
the twists are very important for your
organs of digestion very important for
your heart and even for your lungs so
it's important to give a twist in we're
going to do two today again will repeat
this one right hand here left hand
behind you sit up tall and then just
twist to your own body's ability and
what feels good breathe and then come
nice and slow back to the center will
place our left arm on the chair will sit
up tall and a gentle twist here
and let's return nice and slow back to
the center take a deep breath
so I'm just gonna check in and see like
how to twist make you feel how to twist
make you feel in when you do a twist how
about you Vicki I just like the way my
body mm-hmm it does it's very energizing
how about you Julie sometimes I can kind
of in a way
yes you can feel that almost adjustment
in your spine and as I've gotten older I
do appreciate it when I'm twisting I'm
like okay this is like backing out of
the driveway and you can start to feel
how your daily activities could be
limited if you could not maintain that
ability to twist your body around so I
as I've gotten older I really value how
much my body has the ability to twist I
don't want to lose lose any of that so
we have another twist for you coming up
now it's time to have some fun with
straps I noticed that Lin pulled out a
blanket to sit on de she moved to the
floor I wanted to ask her a little bit
about that tell us a little bit how the
blanket works for you in well sometimes
I have a little bit of pain in my lower
back a little bit of tension and if I
sit on this blanket it tips my pelvis
forward just a little bit so I can
release through the lower back and it's
so much more comfortable all right yes
and so did you use blanket under hips
for a lot of your seated poses and
forward folds mm-hmm and so just about
any kind of firm blanket will do and if
you find sitting on the floor Sun
comfortable at home you might try that
just folding it nice and firm and then
having to sit right on the edge the
other thing we want to share with you is
those of you that are joining us at home
we're encouraging you very much so to
consider moving off of the couch and off
of the chair on down to the floor
Vicki's going to show you how you might
go about that if you haven't been on the
floor for a while and she's going to
show you how to use a chair to kind of
work yourself on down to the floor so
you can put your body weight on the
chair is Vicki showing and start to ease
yourself down on the floor and the best
part is then you're going to have that
chair right by you when you come back up
so just sitting on the floor is very
valuable for your health but not every
day not all the time can we sit on the
floor so Julie and I will be
demonstrating if you're doing your
practices morning or afternoon or
wherever you're watching in a chair all
right we're going to be stretching our
right leg first we're going to have our
left leg folded or perhaps you'll be
turning your left leg in and John use
your sauna as we extend the right one
out so what you do with the left leg is
up to you actually Lin while you are
there I'm going to mention that you can
also use blankets and slip them
underneath knees so if when your knee is
up like this and you feel like it hurts
you could slip something from home a
cushion a blanket anything underneath
that knee for a little bit of support
just as an additional tip all right so
we've got our left leg bent in our right
leg extended out where to take the strap
and place it across the ball of the
right foot
the left leg if you're in a chair is
important it's kind of keeping you from
falling off the chair you want to make
sure that the bottom of the foot is
grounded and if you're working in a
chair but you can still take your shoes
and socks off it would be good to be
barefoot we're going to use the strap to
help our posture so you want to pull on
the posture or pull on the posture pull
on the strap to lift your chest up see
if you can roll your shoulders back and
then once you feel nice and elongated
let's just tip forward from the hips so
how are you feeling this Julie
yes how does that feel okay tight a good
yep to stretch how about you land where
are you feeling this I feel it all the
way along the back of my leg and how
about you Vicki I am pretty flexible and
so I generally do her to feel it belongs
no two people feel the same stretch in
exactly the same way so even as we're
moving into similar stretches all of us
are feeling in a slightly different way
so if we say you're going to feel this
in the back of the leg but you actually
feel it someplace else doesn't mean
you're doing it wrong it's just that
each yoga pose has its own identity in
your body let's change sides on this so
we're gonna extend the other one out see
that you're placing the strap across the
ball of your foot you don't want to let
it slide down into the arch and then
yank and on the arch of your foot it's
nice to be right across the ball of the
foot and then you can actually push into
the strap with the ball of your foot
grab ahold of strapping you elongate
your spine and then holding that
elongation with your belly pulled in
firmly just start to lean forward this
might not look like very much stretch
for someone just tuned in on a TV show
and sees someone stretching like this
but actually there's quite a bit of
intensity to the stretch don't you think
so where do you feel you can get more
intensity from here maybe by pushing
into the strap a little bit
yes a strap allows us to get a little
bit more engagement there and let's rise
up on a big inhale and we'll slip that
strap off ok we're going to pummel the
feet again I will leave it to you girls
to pummel your feet from that position
so yep there you go so the next one's a
little trickier we're going to do it
with the sling I'll demonstrate this one
and I would have you see if you could
bring your right leg over to your left
in a cross-legged position Vicky so even
just regular schools cross-legged just
both
or in front just like that is that
better yes Lynn how could you cross your
leg right one in front in a different
manner than hers
I've got mine here or I could even go
here and then from wherever you're at
let's lean forward so we have four
versions of right leg over left minus
cross a little higher on the leg Julie's
a little bit lower on the ankle men's
and Vicki's in a slightly different
place in front and let's come slowly up
and we'll change sides so releasing so
just to review the left ankle is going
to cross over the right but it could be
cross-legged like this it could be like
this it could be just here and actually
we didn't show this version we should
remember the strap or hear any way that
works for you bring your left ankle over
your right and take a forward fold in
this version I've taken the bend out or
the pressure out for the knee and
supporting it with a strap but again
it's a cross
and you want to breathe in when you come
all the way up we're gonna release that
leg anyway that works for you extend
your legs out in front of you and let's
pummel those feet wake them up excellent
now we're ready for a twist that we're
going to choose to do on the floor or on
a chair so if you're on your chair you
can stay committed to that chair
position but if you're thinking along
the lines of maybe I should get on the
floor now here's a great opportunity to
slip yourself right down the floor for
our final twist
once we start to get to our material
that involves straps I just want to take
a moment here and suggest some other
things in case you don't have a strap
like this around the house that would do
so Vicki you have a suggestion what did
you think would work besides a strap
well if you're a new year kitchen you
can use a kitchen towel you can use a
scarf or tie or a belt yes a built a
necktie tube sock Julie any suggestions
those are all goodness how about you
have any suggestions no you covered yeah
so just about anything you can find and
so what does that mean no excuses right
and also you could take something we
talked about the tennis ball and
traveling with that you know something
like this we're going to show you some
shoulder stuff to stick it in your work
drawer at your desk so that you have it
to stretch out when you've been working
at the computer so now let's take our
straps and we're going to begin by
slipping them over the ball of the right
foot we did a stretch stretch similar to
this stretching the back of the leg but
now we want to amp it up a little bit
and be adding a little core so again
begin by pushing into the strap of the
ball of the foot engaging the upper body
but this time bring your awareness into
your torso and start to pull in your
lower belly below your navel Center
you're going to be engaging your arms
here as well so engaging your little
belly engaging your arms continuing the
stretch see if you might lift that foot
up off the ground just even the smallest
amount eventually you'll become stronger
not just with the arms but with your
core you might be able to bring that leg
up quite a bit keeping in the alignment
in your spine you might even tip your
body a little bit bad you're going to
stop the point that you feel strain in
the neck or the face or the shoulders or
the arms and then again we want to come
out of all of our poses mindful e so
we're just going to gently lower that
leg all the way back to the ground
notice how release of the arms feels
good did you guys feel that in your
biceps and let's try that on the other
side so again some of these things that
we're doing look pretty simple and maybe
even easy and so I would encourage you
to grab the nearest belt and when you're
ready and give it a try we're working
here with up strengthen our arms to help
support the weight of our leg and we're
also using our core muscles to do that
so we've got our low belly pulled in and
our back muscles are working those
muscles work even more as we start to
tilt tilt our body slightly back and
listening listening as you go to see
what's the best place for you to pause
and rest
then come all the way back to
and Sylvester
let's do our little feet thing again and
then get ready to take the strap up and
over our heads and so this time when
you're holding your strap or your dish
towel or your scarf or your belt you're
going to have your thumb on the bottom
and the fingers on the top and we're
going to explore possibly range of
motion and by that I mean I'm going to
just move my chair back a little bit in
your girl's side more room you might not
be able to bring your arms up very high
so let's see what our bodies will do we
just start to lift the strap float up in
front of us a little bit and then what
happens to everyone to all of us is you
get kind of stuck it feels uncomfortable
it won't go further without pain see if
you can give yourself more strap make it
wider and see if it'll come up any
further and again sometimes you get to a
spot where it feels uncomfortable
there's some pain see if you can give
yourself a little bit more strap and
bring it slowly a little bit wider take
it just to where you feel is your range
of motion for today and then let
everything come slowly all the way back
down in slow motion with the relaxed
face and full diaphragmatic breathing
with the strap rest we'll add our arms
rest and take a long full breath cycle
here
how did that feel Julie Oh was a good
stretch yes how about you Lynn where you
like that stroke well I love it right in
between my shoulder blades in the back
yes Vicky got a little bit further today
than I did yesterday excellent and you
know maybe your office kool Kris open
kilo crazy doing this at work but
honestly the health benefits are worth
it
a true yoga session always ends with
relaxation whether you're practicing at
home or in a yoga class and a beautiful
way to begin your relaxation is with a
gentle twist twist release tension along
your spine also add a lot of circulation
to our organs we're going to do two
different twist here today the floor and
a seated chair twist so vicki and lynn
will be doing for twists julie and i
will be doing a twist on the chair i'm
going to get them started on the floor
twist first and then we'll join them so
on the floor twist you'll have your feet
about hip-width apart a little bit wider
if that feels more comfortable for you
and your arms are positioned alongside
you on the floor where you feel the
safest and most open we're going to
slowly be dropping our arms or large I'm
sorry our legs towards the right so when
you're ready gently let your legs start
to roll to the right if you feel like
this is too much twist in your body you
can gently move your legs further away
from your body so feet away gives less
twists and feet towards the body will
give you more twists and so that's a
nice gauge for you to use also coming
out of your twist it's important to
support your back so to come out of your
twist your exit strategy begins with
your belly and your breath so you're
going to breathe in while you bring your
knees back to the center and then as you
exhale you let your legs gently fall to
the opposite direction often it's the
lower leg that doesn't want to release
in a twist sometimes we have to shake it
a little bit and then
go this is a lovely twist through your
organs of digestion your liver has a lot
of space here and most importantly we
want to let the central nervous system
get nice and calm coming out of your
twist going to pull your belly in
breathe in bring your knees nice and
slow back to the center and then I'll
have you ladies just continue to do that
twist one more time each side on your
own while Julie and I set ourselves up
for a chair twist so Julie we're going
to be turning to the left first
lengthening the spine or you just turn
from the shoulders and the waist and
even invite the knees to come along with
us and we're just spinning slowly around
in our chair you can go to any level
that you want you can stop short or you
can go further we want to keep the crown
of our head nice and lifted as we circle
back Center and the chin level to the
floor so slowly return back to the
center in your chair breathing in and
pausing Center getting ready to do the
other side so there's a length that
starts it and then you gently turn your
body you can move your feet as you
travel you can move your hands as you
travel inviting that movement into your
body in any way that feels like it's
going to give you a positive experience
and then breathe in coming nice and slow
back to the center Julie and I are going
to sit here with our hands in our laps
and Vicky and Lynn are in a classic
shavasana position with the legs bent or
extended out your choice you want to end
all of your twist practices with an
awareness of your breath moving through
your body take a couple of really nice
slow deep breaths at the end of your
practice give yourself a moment to
process all the beautiful effects of
yoga namaste thank you for joining us
for this episode of yoga with Mona for
everybody